welcome back the panel is with us from
their remote locations NBC News Capitol
Hill correspondent Casey hunt former
congressional budget director and
current president of the American action
forum Douglas holtz-eakin an infectious
disease physician dr. nahin Battaglia
from Boston University Doug I want to
start with you because we've done a lot
on the vaccine we've done a lot on the
reopening on the health aspect of things
but let's talk about the economy
just give us your big-picture sense when
you hear about 2008 you hear about the
Great Depression how would you describe
where we're at right now and where you
think were realistically headed well
Chuck we've had some horrific economic
data we saw the largest one-month
decline in consumer confidence the
largest one-month decline in consumer
spending we've had 30 million people
apply for unemployment insurance in the
past six weeks I think it's fair to
expect that over the months of April May
and June will see national income
decline by 10 percent the worst year in
the Great Depression was 12% we're going
to experience that this spring do you
think Doug I want to stick with you a
minute do you think that that ideas that
have been percolating in Congress left
and right in general have been meeting
the moment or do you feel as if in some
ways members of Congress haven't fully
grasped how big and how gargantuan this
is I think Congress deserves credit for
moving quickly moving dramatically if
you think about what's going on we're
losing 10 percent of national income the
so-called cares act borrowed 10 percent
of national income and is trying to
distribute it to Americans in the form
of unemployment insurance loans to
businesses grants to businesses checks
that's however just a band-aid the real
work has to be to get the economy to
stop falling we cannot do that
continuously so we're gonna have to get
the economy moving again and there
you're at this tough intersection of the
public health mission which has got to
be the primary objective is also the
most important economic policy right and
dr. Bedell yeah I think this is the the
challenge that I feel like you and the
public health community and puttan and
health officials in general there is
life and livelihood and that balance and
and what do you fear from that the
pressure public health officials are
going to be feeling about reopening the
economy what do you fear that's going to
lead to well Chuck you heard Tom angles
me talk about the fact that the
conditions haven't changed from when we
cut the lock down into place which means
reopening is this balance of you know
restarting economy against acceptance of
the risk that we will get more
infections and a portion of those
infections will result in
hospitalizations and deaths when you
look at the preparedness of the states
it's kind of a patchwork right so the
capacity the poor capacities in terms of
testing doctor angles we mentioned the
fact about this idea of how many people
you test and w-h-o says that if you are
testing to a point where more than 10
percent of the people you're testing are
still coming back positive you're not
testing enough now that the 33 states 12
of them have rates above 10% when you
look at ICU capacity of those 33 states
eight of them have already hit their
head room for ICU capacity and when you
talk about contact tracing there's a
Hopkins study that says that we need
hundred thousand contact tracers and
what an NPR did a study of all the
states 41 states responded and said we
have about seven point six thousand
contact tracers and we're looking to
hire 36 thousand more so we're not there
in terms of capacity or it's a patchwork
where some states are potentially doing
it better than other and so my fear as
it is with a lot of public health closes
is ensuring that states meet those
capacities before they take the risk of
putting particularly the vulnerable
amongst our communities at impact risk
so it's nursing homes prisons yeah my
communities let me ask you the question
this way over the last two months in the
medical community what have we learned
enough and with the news on room dis
aveer how much now how much how much
capacity has that bought us how much of
an ability that we know there is some
best practices that can lessen the the
time in the hospital or lessen the
mortality rate how comfortable are you
getting that
were there where that can allow us to
have some more reopening we're
definitely in a better place than we
were you know in some ways so one part
is our testing capacity is better if you
looked at the numbers about a month ago
we were testing 10 people you know 8
people to 10 people for a thousand and
we're now testing about 18 to 19 so
that's better Ram Dass Sudhir is
promising and the fact that it provides
you with the proof of concept as dr.
Falchi has said that there drugs like it
or in itself could help reduce mortality
but we still need a whole other range of
drugs such as we need medications that
if you're exposed potentially it keeps
you from getting sick
so something called post exposure
prophylaxis and then from what we know
about this disease you know we're
learning that it's basically making the
body attack uses uses the body's immune
system to basically attack itself
the virus wreaks havoc and then the rest
of the stuff that happens to the body is
the attack that you're doing on itself
and a lot of drugs they're still in the
works haven't shown are starting to
social some promise but we don't have a
slam-dunk in helping with that aspect of
disease yet we move to the politics here
KC hunt we are going to get a sort of
right in front of a split screen the
Senate is coming back the house isn't
the Senate is is saying well look we've
got to tough it out essentially the
house is saying it's not safe
it's the divide we're seeing in America
in some ways between left and right and
Chuck you're even seeing it in who is
deciding to wear masks when they come up
to Capitol Hill and who isn't and you
know this is emerging as the kind of
partisan divide that I think you know if
you listen to the experts like like
those that we've just been talking to
you know if Americans are not all on the
same page about engaging in the public
health protection measures it gets a lot
harder to get to the point where you can
feel confident in reopening that
everybody will remain healthy and the
longer that this goes on and the sharper
those divisions become the harder the
overall mission
and you know don't forget every month
that goes by we're a month closer to a
presidential election and that's gonna
influence so much of this conversation
as well
I'm curious Casey I was the whole
testing weirdness of the Senate the
president said Oh use this quick testing
feature that we've been using at the
White House and then McConnell and
Pelosi decided not to accept it what is
going on there they don't think that
they should be seen having access to
things that regular everyday Americans
don't have access to and in in that way
the imperative is a little different my
question is if they do bring the house
back it's different from the Senate and
that it's 435 people they are scattered
across all corners of this country all
coming back the risk is very high will
those rank-and-file members say this is
something that we need in order to be
able to function Pelosi and McConnell
are relatively old school and they're
thinking about things like this I mean
there was a lot of reluctance in the
beginning to either close tours at the
Capitol and Nancy Pelosi was saying you
know we are the captains of the ship we
are the last to leave at the end of the
day concerns among her members pushed
her to change course on that all right
Douglas holtz-eakin with the economy
Nahid Medallia on health and Casey hunt
there in politics thank you all Casey
you stick around for a little more
political talk hello from Washington I'm
Chuck Todd and thanks for checking out
the Meet the Press channel on YouTube
click on the button down here to
subscribe and click over here to watch
the latest interviews highlights and
other digital exclusives